This directory contains the usb driver for the timestamp card, some
installation scripts and testing software for that driver.

directory content

driver/   directory containing the kernel driver and corresponding support
	  files. In particular, the usbtimetagio.h contains the ioctl
	  definitions needed for any application talking to the device.

desginstuff/ contains some random thoughts which came up during the driver
	     design. 
	  
testapps/ stuff used to test various firmeware and driver evolution stages

Makefile  Script to do what you most likely want to do with these files


Installation:

Before you start to install or compile anything, make sure the directory is
located in a reasonably stable place, and that this directory is not very
likely to removed to any other place as the driver will be loaded from
hotplugging out of this directory structure. Here, this directory should
reside in /home/qitlab/programs/.

Then, you have to compile the driver itself. The earlier versions seems to run
with kernels from 2.6 up to 4.4, with the latest changes confirmed to runon
4.12 kernels.
The compilation is done from themain driver directory by saying

    make

Then, the hotplugging machinery needs to be installed. As of 2018, the udev
method seems to be dominant. You install the hotplugging stuff with the command

    make udev

This installs a udev rule file and a device driver loader into the directory
/etc/udev/rules.d/ of a unified hotplugging mechanism used in this
distribution.


By now, everything should be done. You can check the success of the endeavour
by plugging in a device and looking for a newly created device file
/dev/ioboards/timestamp0.


Driver idea:

The driver itself looks for a device with the Cypress Vendor ID, and the
device ID 0x1234 (This is probably not a very smart choice, but USB.org
charges 4kUS/yr for a real number....)
The connection to the usb device is via endpoint 0, where a set of control
commands are transmitted for various device control commands for RF src
choice, treshld adjustment, autotransmit etc. Some service commands lead to
data sent back via EP1, but they are not relevant for the card operation.

The bulk of the communication from the timestamp card to the driver takes
place via EP2, which is operated as a bulk EP bypassing the microcontroller on
the timestamp and talking to the event FIFO directly. The transfer should be
limited either by the bandwidth of the USB connection, or at the momentary
handshake state engine design to 4.2 Mevents per second of 8 bytes each.

The bulk data gets transferred into a kernel buffer consisting of a reasonably
large size, which is memory mapped into the user space to avoid needless
copying of data for further processing.

The driver should be able to handle multiple cards, although I never tried. It
uses dynamic device minor allocation, and currently is part of the usbdevice
family. An attempt to come up with a dynamic major number and not piggyback on
the usb device unit lead to  hotplugging problems with the udev mechanism I
could not sort out.

It communicates with the end user via a single device file, and there mainly
using the ioctl() methods for device control, and a buffer mapped into user
space using mmap(). Internally, the buffer is a hand-knitted scatter-gather
buffer list of free RAM pages, which in a future driver version should be
replaced by the OS-generic versions of them. Access from the user side takes
place via direct access as a linear array. The size of the buffer is defined
in the mmap call. It is filled asynchronously via a DMA unit, using
concatenated urb requests of dynamically adjusted size to optimize latency and
throughput. It operates both with USB 1.x and USB2.0 host adapters, the only
difference is the mean event rate which can be obtained.

The driver should be able to handle multiple cards plugged into the system,
and at least udev should distribute meaningful device names dynamically.

Driver API:

- request a buffer with the mmap command. 
- various control ioctls for steering the hardware, the DMA engine in the
  driver, and to find out the amount of transferred data. See readevents3.c
  application to get an idea how the commands are used.


Issues:
Not sure if multiple cards will be handled nicely, especially in the 9.3
hotpluging script.

Error scenarios:

The device in /dev/ioboards/timestamp0 does not show up. 

- Test if the system recognizes the device by calling lsusb as superuser
  and look for a device with Cypress Vendor ID and a Device ID of 1234. If you 
  do not find the device, the driver can not be loaded.

- you got the wrong hotplugging script installed. Check your distribution


Christian Kurtsiefer, 30.1.07

Updates to this document with kernel 4.12 adaptation: 14.7.2018chk
